Nexus Java SDK docs (#3160)
temporalio/documentation: docs/develop/java/temporal-nexus.mdx

---
id: nexus
title: Temporal Nexus - Java SDK Feature Guide
sidebar_label: Temporal Nexus

> description: Learn how to use Temporal Nexus within the Java SDK to connect durable executions within and across Namespaces using a Nexus Endpoint, a Nexus Service contract, and Nexus Operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to use Temporal Nexus within the Java SDK to connect Durable Executions within and across Namespaces using a Nexus Endpoint, a Nexus Service contract, and Nexus Operations.
```

toc_max_heading_level: 4
keywords:
  - temporal nexus java sdk

tags:
  - temporal-nexus
  - java-sdk
  - nexus
---

> Use Temporal Nexus to connect durable executions within and across Namespaces using a Nexus Endpoint, a Nexus Service contract, and Nexus Operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Temporal Nexus to connect Durable Executions within and across Namespaces using a Nexus Endpoint, a Nexus Service contract, and Nexus Operations.
```

- [Develop a Nexus Service and Operation handlers](#develop-nexus-service-operation-handlers)
- [Develop a caller Workflow that uses a Nexus Service](#develop-caller-workflow-nexus-service)
- [Make Nexus calls across Namespaces with a development Server](#nexus-calls-across-namespaces-dev-server)
- [Make Nexus calls across Namespaces in Temporal Cloud](#nexus-calls-across-namespaces-temporal-cloud)

## Run a development server with Nexus enabled {#run-the-temporal-nexus-development-server}

The first step in working with Temporal Nexus involves starting a Temporal server with Nexus enabled.

Prerequisites:

- [Install the latest Temporal CLI](https://learn.temporal.io/getting_started/java/dev_environment/#set-up-a-local-temporal-service-for-development-with-temporal-cli)
- [Install the latest Temporal Java SDK](https://learn.temporal.io/getting_started/java/dev_environment/#add-temporal-java-sdk-dependencies) (v1.26.0 or higher)

### Start the Temporal Development Server {#start-the-temporal-development-server}

Start the Temporal Development Server by using the `temporal server start-dev`, with `system.enableNexus=true`.

> The HTTP port is required for Nexus communications.

Reviewer: - Is there a standard for the port number? (gRPC + 10?) 
- Why is it required?

Reviewer: How about "The Server will error if the port is not specified when enabling Nexus."

```
temporal server start-dev --http-port 7243 --dynamic-config-value system.enableNexus=true
```

> This command automatically starts the Web UI, creates the default Namespace, and uses an in-memory database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command automatically starts the Temporal development server, the Web UI, creates the `default` Namespace, and uses an in-memory database.
```

The Temporal Server should be available on `localhost:7233` and the Temporal Web UI should be accessible at [http://localhost:8233](http://localhost:8233).

## Create caller and handler Namespaces {#create-caller-handler-namespaces}

Before setting up Nexus endpoints, create separate Namespaces for the caller and handler.

```
temporal operator namespace create --namespace my-target-namespace
temporal operator namespace create --namespace my-caller-namespace

> ```

Reviewer: Would be nice to briefly describe the two roles.

Author: Added a brief description below https://github.com/temporalio/documentation/pull/3160/commits/bcb8c78a36e59b076e6248bf44a6c85e8dd65988

## Create a Nexus Endpoint to route requests from caller to handler {#create-nexus-endpoint}

After establishing caller and handler Namespaces, the next step is to create a Nexus Endpoint to route requests.

```
temporal operator nexus endpoint create \
  --name my-nexus-endpoint-name \
  --target-namespace my-target-namespace \
  --target-task-queue my-handler-task-queue
```

## Define the Nexus Service API contract {#define-nexus-service-api-contract}

Defining a clear API contract for the Nexus Service is crucial for smooth communication between services.

[View the source code](https://github.com/temporalio/samples-go/tree/main/nexus) in the context of the rest of the application code.

```
git clone https://github.com/temporalio/samples-java.git
cd samples-java
```

> The Nexus Service API contract can be in whatever form works best for your environment.

Reviewer: Maybe add "for example" for the contract forms, whatever is industry standard?

Author: Sorry could you clarify what you mean here ?

Reviewer: You say "in whatever form works best for your environment", which is confusing. Not sure if you mean to refer to standard formats and specs for API contracts or something else. Giving "such as" examples makes it clear what you're suggesting.

> Each [Temporal SDK includes and uses a default Data Converter](https://docs.temporal.io/dataconversion), that encodes payloads in the following order: Null, Byte array, Protobuf JSON, and JSON.

Reviewer: Consider breaking into two sentences.

> In a polyglot environment, Protobuf and JSON are common choices. This example uses Java classes serialized into JSON.

Reviewer: Consider defining, such as "In a polyglot environment, that is where more than one language and SDK is being used to develop a Temporal solution, Protobuf and..."

public class NexusServiceImpl {
// ...
  @OperationImpl
  public OperationHandler<NexusService.HelloInput, NexusService.HelloOutput> hello() {
    // Use the WorkflowClientOperationHandlers.fromWorkflowMethod constructor, which is the easiest
    // way to expose a workflow as an operation.
    return WorkflowClientOperationHandlers.fromWorkflowMethod(
        (ctx, details, client, input) ->
            client.newWorkflowStub(
                    HelloHandlerWorkflow.class,
                    // Workflow IDs should typically be business meaningful IDs and are used to
                    // dedupe workflow starts.
                    // For this example, we're using the request ID allocated by Temporal when the
                    // caller workflow schedules
                    // the operation, this ID is guaranteed to be stable across retries of this
                    // operation.
                    //
                    // Task queue defaults to the task queue this operation is handled on.
                    WorkflowOptions.newBuilder().setWorkflowId(details.getRequestId()).build())
                ::hello);
  }
}
```

<!--SNIPEND-->

> Workflow IDs should typically be business meaningful IDs and are used to dedupe Workflow starts.q

Author: There is another line here in the Go SDK docs

https://docs.temporal.io/develop/go/nexus#develop-an-asynchronous-nexus-operation-handler-to-start-a-workflow

> For the HelloOperation, input.ID is passed as part of the Nexus Service contract.

And I could not figure out what it was trying to say

Author: gotcha added a note on this

import io.temporal.client.WorkflowClient;
import io.temporal.samples.nexus.options.ClientOptions;
import io.temporal.worker.Worker;
import io.temporal.worker.WorkerFactory;
import io.temporal.worker.WorkflowImplementationOptions;
import io.temporal.workflow.NexusServiceOptions;
import java.util.Collections;

public class CallerWorker {
  public static final String DEFAULT_TASK_QUEUE_NAME = "my-caller-workflow-task-queue";

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    WorkflowClient client = ClientOptions.getWorkflowClient(args);

    WorkerFactory factory = WorkerFactory.newInstance(client);

    Worker worker = factory.newWorker(DEFAULT_TASK_QUEUE_NAME);
    worker.registerWorkflowImplementationTypes(
        WorkflowImplementationOptions.newBuilder()
            .setNexusServiceOptions(
                Collections.singletonMap(
                    "NexusService",
                    NexusServiceOptions.newBuilder().setEndpoint("my-nexus-endpoint-name").build()))
            .build(),
        EchoCallerWorkflowImpl.class,
        HelloCallerWorkflowImpl.class);

    factory.start();
  }
}
```

<!--SNIPEND-->

### Develop a starter to start the caller Workflow

> To initiate the caller Workflow, a starter program is required.

Reviewer: Are there other ways? Can a child Workflow be used?

Author: I changed the wording here to `used` since there are multiple ways to start a workflow and all are in principle valid, but the sample only does one way.

    WorkflowClient client = ClientOptions.getWorkflowClient(args);

    WorkflowOptions workflowOptions =
        WorkflowOptions.newBuilder().setTaskQueue(CallerWorker.DEFAULT_TASK_QUEUE_NAME).build();
    EchoCallerWorkflow echoWorkflow =
        client.newWorkflowStub(EchoCallerWorkflow.class, workflowOptions);
    logger.info("Workflow result: {}", echoWorkflow.echo("Nexus Echo 👋"));
    logger.info(
        "Started workflow workflowId: {} runId: {}",
        WorkflowStub.fromTyped(echoWorkflow).getExecution().getWorkflowId(),
        WorkflowStub.fromTyped(echoWorkflow).getExecution().getRunId());
    HelloCallerWorkflow helloWorkflow =
        client.newWorkflowStub(HelloCallerWorkflow.class, workflowOptions);
    logger.info("Workflow result: {}", helloWorkflow.hello("Nexus", NexusService.Language.ES));
    logger.info(
        "Started workflow workflowId: {} runId: {}",
        WorkflowStub.fromTyped(helloWorkflow).getExecution().getWorkflowId(),
        WorkflowStub.fromTyped(helloWorkflow).getExecution().getRunId());
  }
}
```

<!--SNIPEND-->

## Make Nexus calls across Namespaces with a development Server {#nexus-calls-across-namespaces-dev-server}

> To run the tutorial, follow the steps below to run the Nexus handler Worker, the Nexus caller Worker, and the starter.

Reviewer: Suggest starter app or other noun after "starter".

Author: added

### Run Workers connected to a local development server

In separate terminal window, run the Nexus handler Worker:

```bash

> ./gradlew -q execute -PmainClass=io.temporal.samples.nexus.handler.HandlerWorker \

Author: Yes that would be expected because `googleJavaFormat` v1.16.0 doesn't support Java 21. I'll make a note to bump this

[main] INFO  i.t.s.nexus.caller.CallerStarter - Workflow result: ¡Hola! Nexus 👋 
[main] INFO  i.t.s.nexus.caller.CallerStarter - Started workflow workflowId: 9cb29897-356a-4714-87b7-aa2f00784a46 runId: 7e71e62a-db50-49da-b081-24b61016a0fc
```

## Make Nexus calls across Namespaces in Temporal Cloud {#nexus-calls-across-namespaces-temporal-cloud}

This section assumes you are already familiar with [how connect a Worker to Temporal Cloud](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/java/core-application#run-a-temporal-cloud-worker).
The same [source code](https://github.com/temporalio/samples-go/tree/main/nexus) is used in this section, but the `tcld` CLI will be used to create Namespaces and the Nexus Endpoint, and mTLS client certificates will be used to securely connect the caller and handler works to their respective Temporal Cloud Namespaces.

### Install the latest tcld CLI and generate certificates

To install the latest version of the `tcld` CLI, run the following command:

```
brew install temporalio/brew/tcld
```

If you don’t already have certificates, you can generate them for mTLS Worker authentication using the command below:

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe mention that they're valid in this example for 1 year?

Author: Added a note below https://github.com/temporalio/documentation/pull/3160/commits/e362237937feddb32b1497f8ed2498fcf3277012

tcld gen ca --org $YOUR_ORG_NAME --validity-period 1y --ca-cert ca.pem --ca-key ca.key
```

### Create caller and handler Namespaces

> Before deploying to Temporal Cloud, ensure the appropriate Namespaces are created for both the caller and handler.

Author: I added a note when we first introduced the two namespaces explaining why we used two https://github.com/temporalio/documentation/pull/3160/commits/c0a7aa4259974917b026cff67a78f1178b879104

If you already have these Namespaces, this step is optional.

```
tcld login

tcld namespace create \
	--namespace <your-caller-namespace> \
	--region us-west-2 \
	--ca-certificate-file 'path/to/your/ca.pem' \
	--retention-days 1

tcld namespace create \
	--namespace <your-target-namespace> \
	--region us-west-2 \
	--ca-certificate-file 'path/to/your/ca.pem' \
	--retention-days 1
```

Alternatively, you can create Namespace through the UI: [https://cloud.temporal.io/Namespaces](https://cloud.temporal.io/Namespaces).

### Create a Nexus Endpoint to route requests from caller to handler

> To create a Nexus Endpoint you must have a Developer account role or higher, and have NamespaceAdmin permission on the `--target-namespace`.

Reviewer: What about users who have the "read only" role who have been granted Namespace Admin permissions and have access to both Namespaces?

```
tcld nexus endpoint create \
  --name <my-nexus-endpoint-name> \
  --target-task-queue my-handler-task-queue \
  --target-namespace <my-target-namespace.account> \
  --allow-namespace <my-caller-namespace.account> \

>   --description-file description.md

Author: done https://github.com/temporalio/documentation/pull/3160/commits/6b5d8b9c533c3bd99478590dbdfddcfbbac4b993

[main] INFO  i.t.s.nexus.caller.CallerStarter - Workflow result: ¡Hola! Nexus 👋 
[main] INFO  i.t.s.nexus.caller.CallerStarter - Started workflow workflowId: 9cb29897-356a-4714-87b7-aa2f00784a46 runId: 7e71e62a-db50-49da-b081-24b61016a0fc
```

## Observability

### Web UI

A synchronous Nexus Operation will surface in the caller Workflow as follows, with just `NexusOperationScheduled` and `NexusOperationCompleted` events in the caller’s Workflow history:

![Observability Sync](/img/nexus-go/go-sdk-observability-sync.png)

An asynchronous Nexus Operation will surface in the caller Workflow as follows, with `NexusOperationScheduled`, `NexusOperationStarted`, and `NexusOperationCompleted`, in the caller’s Workflow history:

![Observability Async](/img/nexus-go/go-sdk-observability-async.png)

### Temporal CLI

Use the `workflow describe` command to show pending Nexus Operations in the caller Workflow and any attached callbacks on the handler Workflow:

```
temporal workflow describe -w <ID>
```

Nexus events are included in the caller’s Workflow history:

```
temporal workflow show -w <ID>
```

> For **asynchronous Nexus Operations** the following are reported in the caller’s history:

Reviewer: Is there any interesting metadata of note to along with these events?

Author: I don't think so?

- [Install the latest Temporal Java SDK](https://learn.temporal.io/getting_started/java/dev_environment/#add-temporal-java-sdk-dependencies) (v1.26.0 or higher)

### Start the Temporal Development Server {#start-the-temporal-development-server}

Start the Temporal Development Server by using the `temporal server start-dev`, with `system.enableNexus=true`.
The HTTP port is required for Nexus communications.

```
temporal server start-dev --http-port 7243 --dynamic-config-value system.enableNexus=true
```

This command automatically starts the Temporal development server, the Web UI, creates the `default` Namespace, and uses an in-memory database.

The Temporal Server should be available on `localhost:7233` and the Temporal Web UI should be accessible at [http://localhost:8233](http://localhost:8233).

## Create caller and handler Namespaces {#create-caller-handler-namespaces}

Before setting up Nexus endpoints, create separate Namespaces for the caller and handler.

```
temporal operator namespace create --namespace my-target-namespace
temporal operator namespace create --namespace my-caller-namespace
```

> The role of `my-target-namespace` will be to contain the Operation handler. The role of `my-caller-namespace` will be to attempt to call the Operation handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The target Namespace (`my-target-namespace`) hosts the Operation handler.
The caller Namespace (`my-caller-namespace`) calls the handler in the target Namespace.
```

Also recommend that you move this after line 61.

Reviewer: In the text that follows below, the target Namespace is called the handler Namespace. Maybe update this to be called the handler consistently, and update the example?
